\documentclass[12pt]{article}

\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{times} %should use 12 pt Times New Roman font.
\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage{mathptmx}
\usepackage{hyperref}

\usepackage[style=authoryear]{biblatex}
\addbibresource{references.bib}

\usepackage{titlesec}
\titleformat*{\section}{\normalsize\bfseries}

\begin{document}

\begin{center}
  \textbf{MOOCulus: Iteratively Improving Calculus Instruction}
\end{center}

% PROPOSAL FORMAT
% 
% 1. Proposal overview
% 2. Literature and existing research that informs their proposal
% 3. Context of research (MOOC taught, designed, university/organizational affiliation, MOOC provider, publisher)
% 4. Research questions to be addressed by the project
% 5. Data sources being considered for the project
% 6. Methodology planned for research activities

\section{Proposal overview}

In January 2013, The Ohio State University Mathematics Department
launched its first massive open online course designed to cover the
same content as the local, in-person sections of calculus at Ohio
State.  Part of this MOOC consisted of a home-built platform designed
to deliver randomly-generated interactive problems to students.  This
home-built adaptive learning platform is usable for much more than
calculus: this same platform has already been re-used for a English
writing course called WexMOOC \parencite{gates-foundation-grant}, and
the American Languages Program at The Ohio State has also reached out
to modify the adaptive learning platform to teach English grammar for
their ESL students.

With tens of thousands of students enrolled in the calculus MOOC,
there have been millions of attempts on homework exercises, with data
on each of these attempts.  Funding is sought to use this data to both
evaluate the success of and improve upon the adaptive learning
platform built at OSU.

\section{Literature}

Students abandon STEM majors mostly because of low quality of
instruction in math and science courses ``with calculus often cited as
a primary reason'' \parencite{calculus-programs}.  Research
universities are ``doing the worst job in maintaining student
confidence in their mathematical abilities, enjoyment of mathematics,
and interest in continuing with the mathematics that is needed to
pursue their intended careers'' \cite{calculus-students}.

Discipline-based education research is inherently interdisciplinary
\cite{dber-report}; in studying how best to teach calculus, there are
huge opportunities to apply the interdisciplinary toolkit of
educational data mining (EDM).  Educational data mining is a
relatively recent development, emerging out of a handful of workshops
from the early 00s; since 2008, there has been an annual International
Conference on Educational Data Mining organized by the International
Working Group on Educational Data Mining \parencite{WIDM:WIDM1075}.



``Users have to provide appropriate values for the parameters in
advance in order to obtain good results/model and therefore, the user
must possess a certain amount of expertise in order to find the right
settings.'' \parencite{romero2010educational}.     ``One possible solution
is the development of wizard tools that use a default al- gorithm for
each task and parameter-free DM algorithms to simplify the
configuration and execution for nonexpert users.''

There are, for instance, Java tools for analyzing Moodle data, which
attempt to make educational data mining a bit easif ro teh
novice \parencite{java-data-mining}.

David Bressoud in \cite{bressoud-sky-falling} discusses why more data may be needed:
\begin{quote}
We must have a better sense of who these students are who sit in our college calculus classes. What is the preparation that has gotten them to this point? How can we modify our courses so as to capitalize on the strengths and correct the weaknesses that these students bring?  \textbf{The answers to these questions will necessarily be local, highly dependent on the nature of a given college or university.}  [Emphasis ours.]

There has been specific work done on using computer systems to teach college algebra, such as ALEKS \parencite{hagerty2005using}; 

One method that the OSU mathematics department is already implementing
with growing success for improving student attitudes is
``technology-enhanced lectures,'' which for us, means clicker
questions, lectures with interactive figures, lecture notes and
lecture videos.  The previous pilot in the OSU Department of
Mathematics showed significant improvement in student opinion of the
OSU Department of Mathematics, from 29\% of students having a
favorable opinion, to 80\% of students in the technology-enhanced
sections having a favorable opinion
\cite{miller-tech-enhanced-calculus}.  Grades are not the whole story:
81\% of the ``switchers'' who left STEM received a grade of C or
higher \cite{calculus-programs}.  By targeting student attitudes, an
intervention like Elizabeth Miller's technology-enhanced calculus
addresses a key issue.  The Department of Mathematics therefore
proposes, via a process of faculty oversight, having a third to half
of large calculus courses taught in this technology-enhanced format,
emphasizing methods of active learning like clickers or other ``bring
your own device'' polling.


``Educational data mining (EDM) is an emerging interdisciplinary research area that deals with the development of methods to explore data originating in an educational context. EDM uses computational approaches to analyze educational data in order to study educational questions. This paper surveys the most relevant studies carried out in this field to'' 

Hidden Markov models are widely used in educational data mining; one
nice example of such is Shih-Koedinger-Scheines' 2010 paper
presented at the International Conference on Educational Data Mining,
``Discovery of Student Strategies using Hidden Markov Model
Clustering.''  \parencite{shihdiscovery}


Records the date and time when the real application started.
Invokes the real application and captures all the output messages produced (if any).
Stores these output messages.
Records the date and time when the real application finished.
\parencite{RomeroZaldivar20121058} 
which is much like a simple version of the \parencite{tin-can-api}.


taking into account many features, even if some of the features are
missing, in order to predict student
success \parencite{Zafra201115020}

can predict grades based on only a few assignemnts \parencite{predict-grades}


There 



\section{Context of research}

Coursera was chosen as the MOOC provider, but since Coursera's
platform lacked randomly generated problems, the team at Ohio State
built their own MOOC platform to complement Coursera's services---this
home-built platform is called MOOCulus, and can be explored at
\url{https://mooculus.osu.edu/}.

MOOCulus provides the researchers with a huge amount of data
concerning student interacting with MOOCulus. MOOCulus logs all
student input on homework exercises---this includes interaction with
MOOCulus such as requesting a ``hint'' and obtaining a correct
response on a first attempt.  Since the platform is hosted on OSU
servers, not only do the researchers have immediate access to the
data, but they also have the ability to modify and adapt what type of
data is collected. 


The MOOCulus data is fed into a hidden Markov model to produce an
estimate of the student's understanding. Essentially the students are
assumed to be in one of two states, ``knowing'' and ``unknowing.''
From the students' performance on the exercises provided by MOOCulus,
the hidden Markov model decideds what state each student is in. The
student receives additional practice problems of the same sort until
it is estimated that their understanding reaches a threshold, at which
point the student is given a new type of exercise and the process
repeats.  The overall goal is to keep providing exercises that are
difficult enough to be fun and educational, but not so easy as to
become boring and repetitive.  In spite of the fact that many tens of
thousands of students used MOOCulus, each experienced a personalized
path through the material.  In short, MOOCulus promises to enable
MOOCs to be massive, but not mass-produced.

In addition to building MOOCulus and running Calculus One, both Fowler
and Snapp have experience using technology and analyzing its
effectiveness.  For example, Fowler built the mobile phone clicker
used to measure student engagement for OSU's technology enhanced
calculus lectures, and Fowler's research training includes
high-dimensional data analysis from a topological perspective; Snapp
taught for Calculus Remote at OSU (CROSU), and worked with OSU's
Center for Enterprise Transformation \& Innovation to build
interactive textbooks for the iPad, with the goal of measuring student
engagement while reading the textbook.

\section{Research questions}

As students interact with MOOCulus, the data needed to refine the
parameters of the hidden Markov model are obtained.  At this point a
number of questions arise. To what degree is a correct answer after
three ``hints'' strong evidence of student understanding?  What prior
probability should be assigned to the likelihood of a student to
submit a correct answer on the first try?  The parameters depend
strongly on the particular homework exercise; some exercises are
conceptually deep but procedurally easy, while some questions are
conceptually light but procedurally quite involved, so even a strong
student may make ``careless'' mistakes which the model shouldn't count
against him/her.  It's easy for an expert to qualitatively make these
judgments, but analysis of big data is required to accurately set
these parameters.

This leads to two basic questions:
\begin{itemize}
\item What parameters in the adaptive learning model best align online
  student performance with in-class student performance?
\item To what extent does student use of adaptive learning correlate
  with success in traditional, in-person courses?
\end{itemize}
The former question addresses improving the hidden Markov model that
powers MOOCulus; the second question gets deeper, by addressing the
extent to which adaptive learning helps with in-person courses.

These questions, though framed in the setting of a calculus class, are
quite general. With the MOOCulus platform being used in the above
mentioned WexMOOC, and the additional interest from other departments
on campus, this research would be of interest to many researchers and
educators alike, regardless of their speciality of expertiese.

\section{Data sources}

A large data set already exists from the first run of the Calculus One
MOOC in Spring 2013; with a total enrollment of 47k~students, the
course still had 11,000 students engaging with the material after four
weeks, and 2,000 students at Week~15.  Altogether, a total of
2,079,428 correct answers were submitted to MOOCulus, with a total of
10.3 person-years having been spent by students working problems.  The
activity logs are stored in a SQL database and this database is
imported for analysis into R.

A second iteration of the Calculus One MOOC has been started at OSU
for Fall 2013.  In addition, Snapp is teaching two on-campus calculus
courses: a course for engineers and a course for teachers.  Fowler and
Snapp have obtained a letter of final determination from the
Institutional Review Board facilitating the use of human subjects in
our research.  The proposed plan is to have each of these groups of
students enroll in MOOCulus so that we can directly compare students'
performance in the online course with their in-class performance.


\section{Methodology}

\paragraph{Hidden Markov parameters}

The data will be analyzed in R. The Baum-Welch algorithm will be used
to set the parameters in the hidden Markov model. This will allow the
parameters in the MOOCulus hidden Markov model to be set for each
problem separately. While these parameters are independently of
interest to researchers, they also will provide for a more effective
implementation of MOOCulus in Spring 2014.

\paragraph{Correllation to success}

To assess the correlation between success in the MOOC and success in
the traditional course, in addition to teaching the online MOOC, Snapp
is teaching calculus to two, quite different, student populations in
Fall 2013.  The first is a calculus course for middle school teachers
($n=28$). In this course, students will complete online assignments on
MOOCulus as part of their grade.  The second is a calculus course for
engineering students ($n\approx 200$).  In this course, students will
be encouraged to work online problems in MOOCulus, but there will be
no grade attached to their progress.  By involving his in-person
students also in the online MOOCulus course, the extent to which
participation in the adaptive learning system correlates with success
on in-person assessments can be determined.




\section{Budget needs}
A course buyout provides time for Bart Snapp to perform data analysis,
to write up the results, and to oversee the work of his Master's
student, David Lindberg.  One course buyout for Bart Snapp is 15\% of
the combination of his base salary (\$60132) plus 29.6\% in
benefits. For the spring semester this will amount to $.15 \cdot
1.296\cdot 60132=\$11690$.  To release David Lindberg from his
teaching further costs \$1925/month plus 12.6\% in benefits; for the
Spring Semester from January--May, this costs $\$1925 \cdot 5 \cdot
1.126 = \$10838$.  Altogether, the total cost for the two researchers'
time is \$22528.

\printbibliography

\end{document}

%%% Local Variables: 
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: t
%%% End: 
